---
title: Python version management with Pyenv
author: sebastia
date: 2024-07-05 17:20:15 +0800
categories: [Python]
tags: [computer science]
pin: true
toc: true
render_with_liquid: false
math: true
---

In the previous posts we have seen how to install different python versions in the system but in a cumbersome way, either using `brew` to install another version in your system (and modify manually the PATH variable to make them availiable) or download and compile specific versions or using `conda` for creating new environments using different python version. This is where [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) comes very handy. Pyenv allows you to install different python versions in your system and select which one to use at every moment with a couple of easy commands. In this post we explore how to install and use pyenv, in my opinion the utlimate python version manager for any developer.

## TLDR

Assuming you use `zsh` and on `linux`/`macOS` machine

```bash
git clone https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv.git ~/.pyenv

SRC_FILE="${HOME}/.zshrc"
echo 'export PYENV_ROOT="$HOME/.pyenv"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
echo 'command -v pyenv >/dev/null || export PATH="$PYENV_ROOT/bin:$PATH"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
echo 'eval "$(pyenv init -)"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
```
then `source ~/.zshrc` and check if `pyenv` is installed

```bash
pyenv --version
```

Install a python verision and use it in your current shell

```bash
pyenv install 3.12.4
pyenv shell 3.12.4
```

## Prerequisites to install pyenv

For linux

```bash
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y git \
                        curl \
                        build-essential \
                        libssl-dev \
                        zlib1g-dev \
                        libbz2-dev \
                        libreadline-dev \
                        libsqlite3-dev \
                        libffi-dev \
                        libncurses5-dev \
                        libncursesw5-dev \
                        xz-utils \
                        tk-dev

```

For MacOs

```bash
brew update

brew install git \
             curl \
             openssl \
             readline \
             sqlite3 \
             xz \
             zlib
```

## Install Pyenv

I prefer to install directly clonning the repository into the recommended installation path `~/.pyenv`.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv.git ~/.pyenv
```

Now open `~/.zshrc` (or `~/.bashrc`) and append:

```bash
SRC_FILE="${HOME}/.zshrc"
echo 'export PYENV_ROOT="$HOME/.pyenv"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
echo 'command -v pyenv >/dev/null || export PATH="$PYENV_ROOT/bin:$PATH"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
echo 'eval "$(pyenv init -)"' >> ${SRC_FILE}
```

finally just `source ~/.zshrc` (or `source ~/.bashrc`). Now try 

```bash
whereis pyenv
pyenv --help
```

## Uninstall Pyenv

Remove the directory

```bash
rm -fr ~/.pyenv
```

and the remove the lines you appended in `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc`:


## Installing a specific python version

Let's say I want to install Python `3.11`, I can take a look fo the available versions of `3.11` running

```bash
pyenv install --list | grep 3.11
```

then select `3.11.2`

```bash
pyenv install 3.11.2
```

Let's also install `3.12.4`

```bash
pyenv install 3.12.4
```

Now check which versions you have installed running


```bash
pyenv versions
```

getting

```bash
* system (set by ~/.pyenv/version)
  3.11.2
  3.12.4
```

In asterisk the current active python version in the terminal, in this case system. To uninstall any version (e.g. `3.11.2`) just do

```bash
pyenv uninstall 3.11.2
```

## Setting python version

Pyenv allows you to define which installed python version to use at each time. There is the `global`, `local` and `shell` levels. 

* `global`:  sets the global python version in your system
* `local` : sets a python version for the current directory
* `shell`: sets python version for current shell.

Global python versions are set like `3.11.2` just type in your terminal

```bash
pyenv global 3.11.2
```

Now every time you run `python` in a new terminal, it is going to default to `3.11.2`. 

To set a local python version you type

```bash
pyenv local 3.11.2
```

in your desired directory. You will see it will create a new file called `.pyenv-version` containing `3.11.2`. When you are in your terminal and have `cd`ed to that directory, pyenv will look for that file and point the `python` command to that specific version. This is very useful when developing on specific projects if you want to pin the python version to be used in that project. That being said, the developer obviously has to use `pyenv` to develop in that project.

Finally, to pin a python version for your current interactive shell you just run

```bash
pyenv shell 3.11.2
```

This will be effective as long as you work on that interactive shell, the moment you close it, it defaults to `local` or `global` python versions. I use the `pyenv shell` command for creating new virtual environments with specific python versions, but I will comment on that in a later post.

The hierarchy for the python version is the following, `shell` > `local` > `global` meaning that, if there is a `shell` python version, the terminal will take that, then if not it will default to the `local` then if that doesn't exist it will default to the `global` version.

## A bit of pyenv inner workings

I am not going to rewrite all the information in the `pyenv` [README.md](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv?tab=readme-ov-file#how-it-works), check there for a fully detaile dexplanation on how `pyenv` works. I just want to highlight few things to get a birds eye view. Essentially what `pyenv` installation does is to prepend the path `~/.pyenv/shims`, if you check closely what's in there:

```bash
ls -lhat ~/.pyenv/shims
```

you will find a `python` and `pip` executables among others. Every time you run `python` your shell tries to find that executable in the directories in its `PATH`, starting from the first. By prepending ` ~/.pyenv/shims` to the `PATH`, the `python` executable found will be ` ~/.pyenv/shims/python`. Then, that `python` is actually an executable that redirects the call to `pyenv` which in turn decides wether to point to `global`, `local` or `shell` python versions. This is very clean!

Different versions of python are installed under `~/.pyenv/versions`. Without using shims you can call directly any python version you have installed on your bash/zsh shell, for instance if we want to call python 3.11.2:

```bash
~/.pyenv/versions/3.11.2/bin/python
```

but obviously is not good practice to install packages calling this python, instead you should create a new environment that copy your python version to your new environment in the current directory using `venv` binary from the desired python version (we'll go on details on the next post):


## Conda in pyenv

One of the main reasons why I wouldn't install miniconda directly is because you can actually install it as a `pyenv` version although it is a bit tricky to set up if you still don't want to mess your `PATH` variable. Check the miniconda versions

```bash
pyenv install --list | grep miniconda3
```
try to get the latest version: `miniconda3-latest`, let's proceed to install it

```bash
pyenv install miniconda3-latest
```

Go ahead and make it available on shell, then check conda is on your command line

```bash
pyenv shell miniconda3-latest
conda --help
conda --version
```

If you ever need to update this version just run

```bash
conda update -n base -c defaults conda
```

Now you can create a new virtual environment called `myenv2`:

```bash
conda create -n myenv2 python=3.12 -y
```

After this it gets trycky if you want to activate the environment. Normally you would run `conda activate myenv2` but then conda complains that you need to run `conda init zsh` (in my cas since I use zsh) first, which writes some lines to `~/.zshrc` that allow you to activate an environment by modifying the PATH. I pesonally don't like letting conda control my environment PATH (that's why I use `pyenv` after all) so I'll try to avoid that. Instead I won't use the `activate` functionality to have it available on your shell, I just call the python binary:

```bash
PYTHON_VERSION=miniconda3-latest
ENV=myenv2
${PYENV_ROOT}/versions/${PYTHON_VERSION}/envs/${ENV}/bin/python --version
```

this is pretty handy to use in bash scripts. See that every new environment we install using conda will be placed in the directory `~/.pyenv/versions/miniconda3-latest/envs/`.


## Conclusions

pyenv is a versatile python version manager. It simply works and allows you to use other managers like `minicionda` or `mamba`. It is my preferred way of managing python versions in a development environment by far.