---
title: Install Conda
author: sebastia
date: 2024-07-04 16:23:12 +0800
categories: [Python]
tags: [computer science]
pin: true
toc: true
render_with_liquid: false
math: true
---

[Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/) is a distribution of the Python and R programming languages for scientific computing, data science, machine learning, and large-scale data processing. It simplifies package management and deployment, and it provides many useful tools and libraries out of the box. Having said that I have to confess that I'm not really a fan of anaconda, it basically contains many packages and software you may not want to use like [Spyder IDE](https://www.spyder-ide.org/) (I use vscode instead), Anaconda navigator, a UI that helps you manage your virtual environments, [RStudio](https://posit.co/) for [R](https://www.r-project.org/) and lots of python packages that you may not want to use. I downloaded to install it today and the installation helper advises me that total installation is 4.82 GB. As you may guess, I'm not installing Anaconda today not even for a try (I did it in the past).

A better alternative (IMHO) to Anaconda is its mini-version, [miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/). It's basically the anaconda environment manager and package installer without all the fancy UI you may not need. In this post we'll show how to install it

## TLDR

For MacOS and zsh terminal

```bash
mkdir -p ~/miniconda3
curl https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -o ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh
bash ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh -b -u -p ~/miniconda3
rm -rf ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh
~/miniconda3/bin/conda init zsh
source ~/.zshrc
```


## Install miniconda

As of today you have the following versions:

* MacOS Intel (old Macs) [Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh), 
* MacOS M1 ARM (new Macs) [Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-arm64.sh](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-arm64.sh) 
* Linux [Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh). 
* Windows [Miniconda3-latest-Windows-x86_64.exe](https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Windows-x86_64.exe)

I'm going to show how to install for MacOS intel, but you should find all instructions [here](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/). It is as easy as to download a bash script and execute it, that will complete the installation.


```bash
mkdir -p ~/miniconda3
curl https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-MacOSX-x86_64.sh -o ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh
bash ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh -b -u -p ~/miniconda3
rm -rf ~/miniconda3/miniconda.sh
```

That installs miniconda but to make it availiable to your shell command you should 

```bash
~/miniconda3/bin/conda init bash
```

if you are using bash or

```bash
~/miniconda3/bin/conda init zsh
```

if you use zsh. For instance, in zsh, this will append some lines of code at your `~/.zshrc`, check it by running `cat ~/.zshrc` and see that conda has created the code in between `# >>> conda initialize >>>` and `# <<< conda initialize <<<`. Now, to update your command line just run

```bash
source ~/.zshrc
```

(or `~/.bashrc` if you use bash) and see that the command `conda` is there. If that works, congrats you have conda installed!. All your conda stuff is in `~/miniconda3`. conda is now available to your system and it has overloaded the `python` command in your terminal, check that by running `which python`, then you'll find that it points to `~/miniconda3/bin/python`. Basically now your default python is managed by conda, that's what conda does when you execute the `init zsh`/`init bash` command to write to your `~/.bashrc`/`~/.zshrc`. 


## Uninstall

To uninstall just remove `~/.miniconda3` and the comments appended in `~/.bashrc` or `~/.zshrc`. In the example shown:

```bash
rm -rf ~/miniconda3
```

Open `~.zshrc` with

```bash
vim ~/.zshrc
```

and renomve everything in between th lines `# >>> conda initialize >>>` and `# <<< conda initialize <<<`. Now refresh your terminal


```bash
source ~/.zshrc
```

type `conda` to see that it's not there anymore.

## Virtual enviroments

The `conda` command is responsible to managing virtual environments. We will investigate that further in a future post but basically an environment is an isolated python where we have installed different pacakges and a specific python version. Virtual environments are perfect if you work on different projects in your system, for instance, if you need `numpy` and python `3.9` in one project and `matplotlib` and python `3.12` in another you need to have two different virtual environments, one for each project. Virtual environments are perfect because they isolate a single python version and a list of packages for each project.

To create a virtual environment callaed `myenv` using python 3.12 just run

```bash
conda create -n myenv python=3.12 -y
```

now you can activate it with

```bash
conda activate myenv
```

Run `which python` and see that it is using a python binary from `~/miniconda3/envs/myenv/bin/python`. The path `~/miniconda3/envs/myenv` is where your new environment has been installed. Now you can install some packages like:

```bash
conda install numpy -y
conda install pandas -y
conda install scikit-learn -y
```

check the packages you have installed in the current activated virtual environment with the command

```bash
conda list
```

and you will find your `numpy`, `pandas` and `scikit-learn` packages that you just installed listed there.

To deactive the environment run

```bash
conda deactivate
```

And to list all your virtual environments managed by conda run


```bash
conda env list
```
Finally, to remove the environment make sure it's deactivated and run

```bash
conda remove --name myenv --all -y
```

## Virtual environments from file

In some projects you will find a file with a name similar to `environment.yml` and contents like:

```yml
name: myenv
channels:
  - defaults
dependencies:
  - python=3.12
  - numpy
  - pandas
  - scikit-learn
```

This specifies a conda environment (the file has been generated using `conda env export --from-history > environment.yml` with the activated environment we created in the last section). Then to install

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
```


## Much more than virtual environment manager

Conda is very convenient to manage dependencies, that is, to resolve conflicts in between different package versions. [conda-forge](https://conda-forge.org/) is defined as a place to find community-led recipes, infrastructure and distributions for conda, this is the secret sauce why conda is so successful in my opinion. The comunity has been able to maintain and distribute compiled packages for different operating systems and architectures and as of today they have over 25.7K packages, check them in the [package browser](https://conda-forge.org/packages/). They make sure the packages are cross platform precompiled so will be able to install no matter what the operating system or platform you use.

Another advantage of conda (that has to do with precompiled software) is that you can install libraries in an isolated environment. It often happens that the machine you are using for developing does not contain [openblas](https://www.openblas.net/) or [opencv](https://opencv.org/), then you can install them with your operating system package manager but if you are not root you don't have those permissions... Then it is convenient to install them in your home directory or simply use conda to download the compiled libraries for your system, that way you don't need to compile and spend time to use the libraries.

We are going to install a compiled library using conda, the chosen library is [opencv](https://opencv.org/), a library for computer vision in C++. 


```bash
conda install conda-forge::libopencv -y
```

where `conda-forge` is the conda channel (the URL where the package lives). Go check that the library has been installed by finding the directory inside your environment


```bash
find $CONDA_PREFIX -name "opencv2"
```

here `$CONDA_PREFIX` should be the prefix of the activated environment. This should output `~/miniconda3/envs/myenv/include/opencv4/opencv2`.

The header files are in this directory, just look for the main ones

```bash
ls -lhat $CONDA_PREFIX/include/opencv4/opencv2 | grep opencv.hpp
ls -lhat $CONDA_PREFIX/include/opencv4/opencv2 | grep core.hpp
ls -lhat $CONDA_PREFIX/include/opencv4/opencv2 | grep imgproc.hpp
```


Now we can check where are the compiled libraries. They should be in the `lib` directory, let's check for the basic ones

```bash
ls -lhat $CONDA_PREFIX/lib/ | grep libopencv_core
ls -lhat $CONDA_PREFIX/lib/ | grep libopencv_imgproc
```

You should be set, then if you wanted to use `opencv` in a C++ program you could use the headers and dynamically link to the library


## My final takeaway

I've mentioned from the beninning that I am not a particular fan of `conda` or `anaconda`, I just find it convenient for someone who is starting its journey with python and want to just code and have things working. I would not recomend it for tools in production, but it is a great tool for data science and machine learning practitioners. As I mentioned, there is no free lunch in convenience, for instance, conda-forge doesn't have all the packages and the ones that they have they are not normally up-to-date so you may end up using `pip` sometimes (more on that in another post). Having two dependency managers is in general not a great idea. Also another thing I find inconvenient is that conda modifies your bash PATH, recall you always have this "base" in your terminal meaning that the "base" environment is active. That IMHO is annoying and also a reminder that conda controls all your python in the system. Of course there are hacks to modify `~/.bashrc` to make that dissapear and get more control to use other python managers, but it's that, a hack. I would better use other tools like [pyenv](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) which I'll present in my next post of this series. The great use of `conda` is as a library manager, it makes it so easy to install libraries in your system that later you can use to compile your programs, even thought you can do it manually `conda install` is so easy to use!.
